5 Things to Know About the Nobel Prize
As we all know the Nobel Prize is one of the most prestigious awards bestowed on individuals or institutions for outstanding achievements in the field ofmedicine physics chemistry literature peace and economics. Questions on Nobel awards are often asked in Prelims and even in Mains. For this we must have sound knowledge of this topic. In this post we will know 5 things about the Nobel Awards well in time before official announcement of the awardees later this month.
Who created the Nobel Prizes?
The prizes in medicine physics chemistry literature and peace were established by the will of Alfred Nobel a wealthy Swedish industrialist and the inventor of dynamite. The first awards were handed out in 1901 five years after Nobels death.
The economics award officially known as the Bank of Sweden Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel wasnt created by Nobel but by Swedens central bank in 1968.
Who can nominate names for the Nobel Prize?
Thousands of people around the world are eligible to submit nominations for the Nobel Prizes. They include university professors lawmakers previous Nobel laureates and the committee members themselves.
Though the nominations are kept secret for 50 years those who submit them sometimes announce their suggestions publicly particularly for the Nobel Peace Prize.
Thats how we know that German Chancellor Angela Merkel Pope Francis former NSA contractor Edward Snowden and imprisoned Saudi blogger Raif Badawi are among this years 273 nominees.
3. The Norwegian connection
The Nobel Peace Prize is presented in Norway while the other awards are handed out in Sweden. Thats how Alfred Nobel wanted it.
Sometimes relations have been tense between the Nobel Foundation in Stockholm which manages the prize money and the fiercely independent peace prize committee in Oslo.
4. What does it take to win a Nobel?
Patience for one. Scientists often have to wait decades to have their work recognized by the Nobel judges who want to make sure that any breakthrough withstands the test of time.
Thats a departure from Nobels will which states that the awards should endow those who during the preceding year shall have conferred the greatest benefit to mankind.
The peace prize committee is the only one that regularly rewards achievements made in the previous year. According to Nobels wishes that prize should go to the person who shall have done the most or the best work for fraternity between nations for the abolition or reduction of standing armies and for the holding and promotion of peace congresses.
5. Nobel Prize winners from India
The following Seven Indians have been awarded Nobel Prize in various fields so far:-
1. Rabindranath Tagore-1913
Rabindranath Tagore is an Indias popular poet and writer. He was awarded Nobel Prize for Literature in 1913 for his Geetanjali a collection of his poems.
2. Chandra Shekar Venkata Raman/Sir C.V.Raman-1930
Sir.C.V. Raman an Indian Scientist / Physicist was awarded Nobel Prize of Physics in 1930 for his Raman Effect related to light.
3. Dr. Hargobind Khorana-1968
Dr. Hargobind Khorana an Indias Doctorate in Chemistry was awarded Nobel Prize for Medicine in 1968 for his study of the Human Genetic Code and its role in Protein Synthesis.
4. Mother Teresa-1979
Mother Teresa is a Yogoslavian nun who became an Indian citizen. She was awarded Nobel Prize for Peace in 1979 for her service through her Charitable Mission Nirmal Hriday at Calcutta to people suffering from Leprosy and to those people dying in destitute.
5. Dr.Subramanian Chandrashekar-1983Dr.Subramanian Chandrashekar an Indian Astro-Physicist was awarded Nobel Prize for Physics in 1983 for his theory on white dwarf stars limitation known as Chandrasekhar Limit. Dr.Subramaniyan is the son of the elder brother of the ‘Nobel Prize Winner’-Sir C.V.Raman.
6. Dr.Amatya Sen-1998
Dr.Amatya Sen an Indian Professor in Economics was awarded Nobel Prize for Economics in 1998 for his work in Economic Theory related to Poverty Democracy Development and Social Welfare.
7. Dr.Venkataraman Ramakrishnan-2009
Dr.Venkataraman Ramakrishnan an Indo-American has shared Nobel Prize for Chemistry for the year 2009 along with a co-American Thomas Steitz and Ada Yonath of Israel for mapping ribosomes the protein procucing factories within cells at the atomic level.8. Mr. Kailash Satyarthi -2014
Mr.Kailash Satyarthi an Indian Children’s rights activist had been awarded the “Nobel Prize For Peace” for the year 2014 jointly with Ms.Malala Yousafzai of Pakistan (17 years old Children’s rights activist of Pakistan) for their struggle against the suppression of children and young people and for the right of all children to education.
The following is a List of Nobel Prize Winners of Persons of Indian Origin and the Citizens of other countries or of Persons of other countries whos received the Nobel Prize for their works related to India:
1.Rudyard Kipling-Rudyard Kipling a British Poet and Writer. And he has been awarded Nobel Prize for Literature for his works in Literature such as Poems and Short Stories related to India and Burma/ Myanmar.
2.Vidiadhar Surajprasad Naipaul-2001Vidiadhar Surajprasad Naipaul a British Writer of Indian Origin was awarded Nobel Prize for Literature in 2001.
Also remember you should know brief details of achievement for which the prizes were awarded. For example S. Chandrashekhar was awarded the Physics Nobel for histheory on white dwarf stars limitation known as Chandrasekhar Limit.
If you have any further queries on Nobel prizes feel free to ask them in the comments below.
