LET THE NOBEL WEEK BEGIN!
Join us live with the Senior Curator Gustav Källstrand from the welcoming of the Nobel Laureates at the Nobel Museum in Stockholm Sweden.
Where are you watching from?
‏2.1‏ אלפים
721
How do we know where we are? How can we find the way from one place to another? And how can we store this information in such a way that we can immediately find the way the next time we trace the same path?
Nobel Laureate May-Britt Moser is a professor of neuroscience and shared the 2014 Medicine Prize for discovering a positioning system an "inner GPS" in the brain that makes it possible to orient ourselves in space demonstrating a cellular basis for higher cognitive function.
In 2005 May-Britt Moser and Edvard I. Moser discovered a type of cell that is important for determining position close to the hippocampus an area located in the center of the brain. They found that when a rat passed certain points arranged in a hexagonal grid in space nerve cells that form a kind of coordinate system for navigation were activated. They then went on to demonstrate how these different cell types cooperate.
”The problem is that I am not very known for my handwriting. I am very bad at signing my signature.”
This year’s Physics Laureate David J. Thouless practiced on a peace of paper before signing the guestbook at the Nobel Foundation in Stockholm. All Laureates since 1952 have signed the book at the end of the Nobel Week while getting their medals and diplomas.
The Peace Laureate one hundred years ago in 1906 Theodore Roosevelt struggled against bad health – but he refused to let it decide his life. The adventurous man from the New York upper class fought in the Spanish-American War in the Phillipines and went on long hunting trips all over the world. After the assasination of President William McKinley he became the youngest ever president of United States of America at the age of 42.
During his time as president between 1901 a...nd 1909 The White House in central Washington DC was crowded with animals. His family had a huge amount of pets living with them in the presidential home. Among them was a lion a hyena five bears Josiah the badger the snake Emily Spinach and the two horses General and Judge to mention just a few.
Theodore Roosevelt was awarded the 1906 #NobelPeacePrize for having negotiated peace in the Russian-Japanese war in 1904-1905. He also resolved a dispute with Mexico by resorting to arbitration as recommended by the peace movement. Theodore Roosevelt was the first US president to be awarded the Nobel Prize. During the one hundred years since then three more have gotten the award all of them in the Peace cathegory.
#OnThisDay 100 years ago one of the bloodiest battles during the First World War the Battle of Verdun ended.
The battle began in february 1916 with a massive german bombardment of the french forts near the town of Verdun. During the nine months of the battle almost one million soldiers from both sides were killed or wounded. Volunteers from the Red Cross worked relentlessly to try to tend the many wounded during the battle.
The battle of Verdun lasted more than 300 days a...nd is considered one of the longest and most costly in human history. The Red Cross was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize the following year in 1917 the only peace prize awarded during The Great War between 1914 and 1918.
Photo: French soldiers moving into attack from their trench during the Verdun battle 1916. Source: www.docpix.fr/Wikimedia Commons
The first experiments to establish fission when an atom is split were performed in Berlin by Otto Hahn and collaborators but he was unable to come up with an explanation. The interpretation in terms of fission was worked out together with Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch. Hahn published their findings without including Meitner as a co-author. In 1948 Otto Hahn nominated Lise Meitner and her nephew Otto Frisch for the #NobelPrize in P...hysics. #womeninscience
Lise Meitner was co-nominated in most nominations for Otto Hahn. Otto Hahn got 39 nominations first one in 1914. Fritz Strassmann got 3 nominations first one in 1941. Lise Meitner got 46 nominations first one in 1924. Otto Robert Frisch got 13 nominations first one in 1945.
Otto Hahn was awarded the 1944 Nobel Prize in Chemistry "for his discovery of the fission of heavy nuclei".
Photo: The Experimental Apparatus with which the team of Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann discovered Nuclear Fission in 1938. The arrangement was originally in 3 separate rooms: irradiation measurement and chemistry at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry in Berlin. Source: Nuclear Fission Deutsches Museum
"In a distant past all poetry was sung or tunefully recited poets were rhapsodes bards troubadours; 'lyrics' comes from 'lyre'. But what Bob Dylan did was not to return to the Greeks or the Provençals. Instead he dedicated himself body and soul to 20th century American popular music the kind played on radio stations and gramophone records for ordinary people white and black: protest songs country blues early rock gospel mainstream music."
Horace Engdahl of The Swedish Academy held this years presentation speech to Literature Laureate Bob Dylan. Read the full speech here: goo.gl/JV1QMk
François Englert and Peter W. Higgs were jointly awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics 2013 for the theory of how particles acquire mass. In 1964 they proposed the theory independently of each other (Englert together with his colleague Robert Brout who passed away in 2011).
In 2012 their ideas were confirmed by the discovery of this elusive particle at the CERN laboratory outside Geneva in Switzerland.
"...the discovery of the Higgs particle is an astonishing triumph of mathematics’ power to reveal the workings of the universe" writes Brian Greene in Smithsonian Magazine.
#OnThisDay 1938 the German chemist Otto Hahn discovered the nuclear fission of uranium which formed the basis of nuclear research for which he in 1944 was awarded the #NobelPrize in Chemistry.
The research proved important for developing both nuclear energy and nuclear weapons.
Otto Hahn is sometimes referred to as the father of nuclear energy. He was an opponent of National socialims in Germany and he helped his collegue physicist Lise Meitner born into a jewish family f...lee Germany. Albert Einstein wrote about him that he was "one of the very few who stood upright and did the best he could in these years of evil".
Hahn was awarded the Nobel Prize while in internment in England and he learned about the Nobel Prize from the newspaper Daily Telegraph. After the war he became very critical about the use of nuclear weopons and campaigned passionately about it.
Some historians mean that Lise Meitner should have been awarded the Nobel Prize with Otto Hahn.
110 years ago the #NobelPrize in Chemistry 1906 was awarded to Henri Moissan "in recognition of the great services rendered by him in his investigation and isolation of the element fluorine and for the adoption in the service of science of the electric furnace called after him".
Amongst other things Moissan developed a new type of furnace in which an electric arc is used as a source of heat. In the furnace Henri Moissan managed to synthesize microscopic diamonds and other ...materials.
A model of himself! Professor Ohsumi who received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine this year donated to the Nobel Museum a model of himself that he r...eceived as a present from colleagues when he received the Kyoto Prize in 2012. In addition he brought us molecular models of some of the protein complexes that he had studied.
16 December 1983: “One Friday night I was driving as was my custom from Berkeley up to Mendocino where I had a cabin far away from everything off in the woods. My girlfriend Jennifer Barnett was asleep. I was thinking…”
...
PCR is a method that made it possible to copy a large numbers of DNA fragments in only a few hours. This makes PCR a very useful method in for instance forensic science as it means that very small amounts of DNA found in blood or hair samples could be enough to reveal a person's identity.
In his Nobel Lecture Kary Mullis gives an entertaining account of his journey that resulted in a powerful invention. Read 1993 Chemistry Laureate Kary Mullis’ story here at Nobelprize.org:http://goo.gl/NC5N8v
Photo: Placing a strip of eight PCR tubes into the thermal cycler in University of Tartu. (Karl Mumm Creative Commons.)
Peace- and womens rights activist Tawakkol Karman was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize 2011 together with Ellen Johnson Sirleaf and Leymah Gbowee "for their non-violent struggle for the safety of women and for women's rights to full participation in peace-building work".
