Awarded for "the Greatest Benefit to Mankind"
Eleven persons were awarded Nobel Prizes in 2016. There are now three new Nobel Laureates in Physics three in Chemistry one in Physiology or Medicine one in Literature one in Peace and two new Laureates in Economic Sciences. See a short presentation of them here.
"I'm sorry I can't be with you in person"
Creating the Nobel Starter
Charcoal baked langoustine and scallop served with nettles ramson and pickled winter apples. "I'm a lover of trees" says chef Sayan Isaksson who personally has composed the edible branches to the 1 350 guests at the Nobel Banquet.
Nobel Peace Prize
2016 Nobel Prize Concert
The Nobel Prize Concert takes place in the Stockholm Concert Hall on 8 December each year this year featuring conductor Gianandrea Noseda soloist Janine Jansen and the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra.
Nobel Week Dialogue
Can we ensure food and nutrition for all? Will food be different in the future? Nobel Laureates world-leading scientists policy makers and the general public joined in an inspiring discussion about 'The Future of Food' at the 2016 Nobel Week Dialogue.
Nobel Peace Prize Forum Oslo
The first Nobel Peace Prize Forum Oslo was held held on Sunday 11 December. The topic was "The United States and world peace after
the Presidential Election". Keynote speakers were former U.S. top officials and foreign policy experts Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski and Dr. Henry Kissinger Nobel Peace Prize Laureate 1973.
What Do the Nobel Laureates Receive?
The Nobel Diplomas
Each Nobel Diploma is a unique work of art created by foremost Swedish and Norwegian artists and calligraphers.
Oldest Laureate
Alfred Nobel Established the Nobel Prizes
On 27 November 1895 Alfred Nobel signed his third and last will at the Swedish-Norwegian Club in Paris. When it was opened and read after his death the will caused a lot of controversy both in Sweden and internationally as Alfred Nobel had left much of his wealth for the establishment of a prize.
A New Home for the Nobel Prize
Nobel Center is to be built on Blasieholmen on a wonderful site along Stockholm's central waterfront. Through its broad public activities the Nobel Center will invite people into the Nobel Prize's unique world of natural sciences humanities and peace efforts and become a meeting place that inspires curiosity and creativity.
