3 brilliant scientists are favored to win a Nobel Prize in Physics — but there's a big problem
You may have heard that physicists recently made an announcement
that could prove to be the most important discovery of the
century:
the first detection of gravitational waves generated from two
colliding black holes.
There's little doubt as to whether the
Norwegian Nobel Committee — who is responsible for nominating
some of the most prestigious prizes in science — will recognize
the achievement with a Nobel Prize in Physics.
The bigger questions are when will the committee award the prize
and to whom? After all the team who made the discovery is a
giant international collaboration of more than 1 000 people but
the Nobel Prize in Physics is only awarded to a maximum of three
individuals each year.
After talking with a few experts Business Insider learned of
three front-runners for the prize. There could also be an
impending deadline that the Nobel committee should not overlook
regarding the health of one of the likely candidates.
On Feb. 11 physicists with the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) broadcasted live to the
world that they had detected gravitational waves for the first
time which opens a new way to study the universe.
"I think that most of the community would agree that the three
pioneers of what became LIGO would be Rainer Weiss Kip Thorne
and Ronald Drever " the head of one of LIGO's observatories in
Hanford Washington Fred Raab told Business Insider.
Weiss
— who is a professor at MIT's Department of Physics — and Drever
— now retired — are both experimentalists who made significant
contributions to the concept design funding and eventual
construction of LIGO.
On the other hand Thorne is a
theorist and the Feynman Professor of Theoretical Physics at
CalTech. Together with his students Thorne conducted much of the
work on what the detection of a gravitational wave would actually
look like and how to identify that signal within the data.
In the end a detection was only possible with the seamless
collaboration between experimentalists who conduct the
experiments and theorists who envision what should come out of
those experiments.
A big problem
The director of the Center for Gravitational Wave Astronomy
Mario Diaz agrees with Raab that these three brilliant minds are
the clear favorites for a Nobel Prize. There's just one problem:
"The big problem with Ronald Drever is that he's very ill " Diaz
said. "Unfortunately his current illness prevents him from
being able to enjoy these results.”
Drever age 85 suffers from dementia and is currently living in
a care home in Scotland his home country. If he is to be awarded
for his pivotal contributions the Nobel committee needs to act
sooner and not later — because after these three front runners
it could be difficult to choose who is more deserving of the
prize compared to others.
"Once you go past those three it gets very very hard " Raab
said. "There were a lot of people who made seminal contributions.
This is the whole problem with picking individuals at least in
this case."
All for one and one for all
REUTERS/NASA
Also Raab asks another important question that others have
echoed in recent years: Why does the Nobel Prize Committee
continue to only recognize individuals for achievements that cost
the efforts of hundreds or even thousands of people?
The 2013 Nobel Prize in Physics for example was awarded to two
individuals who pioneered the research into what led to the 2012
discovery of a Higgs boson. But the collaborative team actually
responsible for the discovery consisted of
over 5 000 researchers.
In this case the LIGO collaboration is no different according
to astrophysicist David Tsang a
postdoctoral fellow at the University of Maryland who focuses on
gravitational waves and was not part of the LIGO collaboration.
Tsang is also a regular member on the popular podcast "The Titanium
Physicists Podcast."
"It's easily worth the Nobel Prize. The only question really I
think is whether or not the Nobel Committee will change their
long standing tradition of only granting to three individuals and
see if they will open it to a collaboration " Tsang told Business
Insider. "I doubt they will but I think it would be very
appropriate."
Tsang actually wagered and lost a bottle of wine by betting
that LIGO's detection was merely one of the regular fake
injections to test the machinery and not the real deal.
"While Rainer Weiss Kip Thorne and Ronald Drever certainly
started and led the collaboration in the early days it quickly
got out of their hands alone and the amount of people that
worked on LIGO is staggering."
A secondary award
Nobel
Prize
Whether or not this trio will win a Nobel Prize in Physics this
year next year or ten years from now is unclear.
The deadline for this year's submissions was Feb. 1. And since
the LIGO collaboration did not publish the results of their
discovery until Feb. 11 they might have missed their chance for
the 2016 award Raab said.
In the end however it's not about receiving a Nobel Raab said.
"The award of the Nobel Prize is kind of a secondary thing " he
said. "Their [he means whomever is awarded] satisfaction that
they get is not from the prize. The satisfaction they get is from
having done something that history will show is a momentous
discovery. They really have opened something that people will
remember 100 years from now as one of the major accomplishments
in science."
