List of Nobel laureates in Physics
The Nobel Prize in Physics (Swedish: Nobelpriset i fysik) is awarded annually by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences to scientists in the various fields of physics. It is one of the five Nobel Prizes established by the 1895 will of Alfred Nobel (who died in 1896) awarded for outstanding contributions in physics.[1] As dictated by Nobel's will the award is administered by the Nobel Foundation and awarded by a committee that consists of five members elected by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.[2] The award is presented in Stockholm at an annual ceremony on December 10 the anniversary of Nobel's death.[3] Each recipient receives a medal a diploma and a monetary award prize that has varied throughout the years.[4]
Contents
The first Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded in 1901 to Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen of Germany who received 150 782 SEK which is equal to 7 731 004 SEK in December 2007. John Bardeen is the only laureate to win the prize twice—in 1956 and 1972. Maria Skłodowska-Curie also won two Nobel Prizes for physics in 1903 and chemistry in 1911. William Lawrence Bragg was until October 2014 the youngest ever Nobel laureate; he won the prize in 1915 at the age of 25.[5] Two women have won the prize: Curie and Maria Goeppert-Mayer (1963) which is the least of any of the original five Nobel Prizes.[6] As of 2016 the prize has been awarded to 203 individuals. There have been six years in which the Nobel Prize in Physics was not awarded (1916 1931 1934 1940–1942).
"for his decisive contributions to elementary particle physics in particular the discovery of a large number of resonance states made possible through his development of the technique of using hydrogen bubble chamber and data analysis"[68]
"for the discovery of the connection between collective motion and particle motion in atomic nuclei and the development of the theory of the structure of the atomic nucleus based on this connection"[75]
"for their pioneering investigations concerning deep inelastic scattering of electrons on protons and bound neutrons which have been of essential importance for the development of the quark model in particle physics"[90]
"for the theoretical discovery of a mechanism that contributes to our understanding of the origin of mass of subatomic particles and which recently was confirmed through the discovery of the predicted fundamental particle by the ATLAS and CMS experiments at CERN's Large Hadron Collider"[113]
^ A. The form and spelling of the names in the name column is according to nobelprize.org the official website of the Nobel Foundation. Alternative spellings and name forms where they exist are given at the articles linked from this column. Where available an image of each Nobel laureate is provided. For the official pictures provided by the Nobel Foundation see the pages for each Nobel laureate at nobelprize.org.
^ B. The information in the country column is according to nobelprize.org the official website of the Nobel Foundation. This information may not necessarily reflect the recipient's birthplace or citizenship.
^ C. The citation for each award is quoted (not always in full) from nobelprize.org the official website of the Nobel Foundation. The links in this column are to articles (or sections of articles) on the history and areas of physics for which the awards were presented. The links are intended only as a guide and explanation. For a full account of the work done by each Nobel laureate please see the biography articles linked from the name column.
