Swedish government and City of Stockholm to invest in Nobel Center
Nobel Center which in a few years time will open its doors along Stockholm’s central waterfront will let visitors to draw inspiration from the discoveries and work of the Nobel Laureates. Through its public activities the Nobel Center will invite people from all over the world into the Nobel Prize’s unique world of natural sciences humanities and peace efforts and become a meeting place that inspires curiosity and creativity.
The #NobelPrize and the life stories of the Nobel Laureates provide a rich source of inspiration on which the Nobel Center will build its exhibitions media productions educational activities events lectures and scientific dialogues.
Last week the Swedish central government agreed to support the activities in Nobel Center for the first three years. Combined with local contribution it will add up to SEK 60 million about 6 5 million USD a year. Mikael Damberg is the Swedish Minister for Enterprise and Innovation:
”Sweden should make better use of the Nobel Prize. Here the main focus is on the festivities in December while the rest of the world concentrates on the prize winners. A Nobel Center can be a huge asset in helping Sweden attract investments visitors and talent ”
Photos: First: A model of the Nobel Center displayed at the Nobel Museum in Stockholm. Second: Mikael Damberg Swedish Minister for Enterprise and Innovation and Lars Heikensten executive director of the Nobel Foundation during a press conference. / Alexander Mahmoud. Third: Olov Amelin director of the Nobel Museum Helene Hellmark Knutsson Minister for Higher Education and Research Mikael Damberg and Lars Heikensten. / Alexander Mahmoud. Fourth: A picture of what the Nobel Center will look like from the south.
First-ever Nobel Peace Prize Forum Oslo invited Henry Kissinger and Zbigniew Brzezinski both former US National Security Advisors on a discussion around world peace after the US presidential election.
"This year's topic was not hard to find. We actually picked it before the election and the result didn't make it less interesting" said moderator Olav Njølstad Director of the Norwegian Nobel Institute.
Thank you everyone who came (full house at the beautiful Aula at Univer...sity of Oslo) and to those who joined the discussion online!
The Colombian President signs his portrait taken by Mads Nissen (right) on the opening of the photographic exhibition Hope over Fear at the Nobel Peace Center in Oslo.
...
The 2016 Peace Laureate was very appreciative of Nissen's work: "He managed to capture what we're going through in Colombia: the past the present and the future says Santos. "I never imagined my picture would be in a museum. I look very serious".
Earlier today 11 December 2016 the Physics Laureate Duncan Haldane visited the Nobel Foundation and quickly became very fascinated with the guestbook that includes signatures from Nobel Laureates since 1952. He also took a closer look at his Nobel Diploma and Medal.
Duncan Haldane was very happy to be in "such good company" and add his name to a book with all his heroes.
LES CAYES Haiti 29 November 2016 – I want to become a professor one day says Sabrina. The little girl is seven years old and has a smile that radiates from ear to ear. Full of energy she lists her favourite topics at school – reading and maths – and her favourite movie – Walt Disney’s ‘Frozen’.…
2016 Chemistry Laureate Bernard Feringa on his #NobelPrize experience. Watch an interview when he talks about letting universities be "playgrounds" and allowing students to be creative. He also talks about his teaching style that by some is perceived as him seeing his students as his "Messi's" really talented soccer players.
The 2016 Medicine or Physiology Laureate Yoshinori Ohsumi has donated two artefacts to the Nobel Museum. One of them is a miniature model of himself together with his microscope. It depicts him at the University of Tokyo about 4 years ago at the moment when he discovered "autophagy" (the discovery he this year was awarded the #NobelPrize for). The miniature model was a gift from his colleagues that he received last year.
Over the years many Nobel Laureates have donated artefacts over the years you can see a complete collection at the Nobel Museum in Stockholm Sweden.
Good evening everyone. I extend my warmest greetings to the members of the Swedish Academy and to all of the other distinguished guests in attendance tonight.
I’m sorry I can’t be with you in person but please know that I am most definitely with you in spirit and honored to be receiving such a prestigious prize. Being awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature is something I never could have imagined or seen coming. From an early age I’ve been familiar with and rea...
The Nobel Prize in Physics 2016 was divided one half awarded to David J. Thouless the other half jointly to F. Duncan M. Haldane and J. Michael Kosterlitz "for theoretical discoveries of topological phase transitions and topological phases of matter".
