Each year King Carl XVI Gustaf personally presents a diploma to the winners during a stately ceremony in the Stockholm Concert Hall.
Photo: Dan Hansson/TT
The Nobel Prize – awarding great minds
Every year in early October the world turns its gaze towards Sweden and Norway as the Nobel Prize winners are announced. In December this prestigious award is celebrated in Stockholm and Oslo.
The prestigious award that captures the world’s attention
The Nobel Prize is considered the most prestigious award in the world. Prize-winning discoveries include X-rays radioactivity and penicillin. Peace Laureates include Nelson Mandela and the 14th Dalai Lama. Nobel Laureates in Literature including Gabriel García Márquez and Doris Lessing have thrilled readers with works such as One Hundred Years of Solitude and The Grass is Singing.
Every year in early October the world turns its gaze towards Sweden and Norway as the Nobel Laureates are announced in Stockholm and Oslo. Millions of people visit the website of the Nobel Foundation during this time.
The Nobel Prize has been awarded to people and organisations every year since 1901 (with a few exceptions such as during World War II) for achievements in physics chemistry physiology or medicine literature and peace. Nobel Day is 10 December. For the prize winners it is the crowning point of a week of speeches conferences and receptions.
At the Nobel Prize Award Ceremony in Stockholm on that day the Laureates in Physics Chemistry Physiology or Medicine and Literature receive a medal from the King of Sweden as well as a diploma and a cash award. The ceremony is followed by a gala banquet. The Nobel Peace Prize is awarded in Oslo the same day.
Prize in Economic Sciences
In 1968 Sweden’s central bank (Sveriges Riksbank) established the Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel. The prize is based on a donation received by the Nobel Foundation in 1968 from the central bank to mark the bank’s 300th anniversary. The Prize in Economic Sciences is awarded by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences following the same principles as the Nobel Prizes.
Legacy of Alfred Nobel
The Nobel Prize is the legacy of Sweden’s Alfred Nobel (1833–1896). Prizes are awarded to ‘those who during the preceding year shall have conferred the greatest benefit on mankind.’ When he signed his last will in 1895 Nobel declared that the bulk of his estate should be converted into a fund and invested in safe securities. The four institutions in Sweden and Norway (the two countries were united between 1814 and 1905) conferring the prizes were to be the Swedish Academy of Sciences Karolinska Institutet in Stockholm the Academy in Stockholm and a committee of five people to be elected by the Norwegian parliament (Stortinget).
The Nobel Foundation
In 1900 the four institutions awarding the prizes agreed to create the Nobel Foundation a private institution based on Alfred Nobel’s will. The Nobel Foundation would administer Nobel’s estate totalling SEK 31 million make public announcements and arrange the prize ceremonies. The total amount awarded each year is based on the most recent return on investment. The capital is currently worth around SEK 4 billion almost double the value of the original estate when adjusted for inflation.
The Nobel Prize in each category is currently worth SEK 8 million. There can be up to three recipients for each prize who share the sum between them.
Organisations affiliated with the prize
The Nobel Prize is affiliated with several organisations and institutions entrusted with different tasks related to the prize. The Nobel Foundation Rights Association was established in 1999 to provide information through a variety of media about the Nobel Laureates and their achievements.
This non-profit association serves as an umbrella organisation for four other entities:
Nobel Media AB which develops and manages programmes productions and media rights of the Nobel Prize within the areas of digital and broadcast media publishing as well as events;
The Nobel Museum AB housed in the Old Stock Exchange Building (Börshuset) in Stockholm’s Old Town creates interest and spreads knowledge around the natural sciences and culture
The Nobel Peace Center at Rådhusplassen in Oslo Norway a showcase which presents the Nobel Peace Prize and the work of the Nobel Peace Prize Laureates; and
The Nobel Prize Education Fund which supports educational outreach focused on the achievements of Nobel Laureates.
Nobel Prize trivia
48 women
The Nobel Prize and the Prize in Economic Sciences have been awarded to women 49 times from 1901 to 2016. One woman Marie Curie has been honoured twice receiving the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics and the 1911 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. This means a total of 48 women have received Nobel Prizes to date: 16 have received the Peace Prize 14 the Prize in Literature 12 in Physiology/Medicine 4 in Chemistry (including Curie) 2 in Physics (including Curie) and 1 in Economic Sciences.
90 years old
The oldest Laureate to date is Leonid Hurwicz who was 90 when he was awarded the Prize in Economic Sciences in 2007.
17 years old
The youngest Laureate to date is Malala Yousafzai who was 17 when she was awarded the Peace Prize in 2014.
Two have declined
Two Nobel Laureates have declined the Nobel Prize. Jean-Paul Sartre awarded the 1964 Nobel Prize in Literature declined the award because he had consistently declined all official honours.
Lê Ðức Thọ was awarded the 1973 Nobel Peace Prize jointly with US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger for negotiating the Vietnam peace agreement. Lê Ðức Thọ said he was not in a position to accept the Nobel Peace Prize due to the situation in Vietnam.
Four forced to decline
Four Nobel Laureates have been forced by authorities to decline the Nobel Prize. Adolf Hitler forbade three German Laureates – Richard Kuhn (Chemistry) Adolf Butenandt (Chemistry) and Gerhard Domagk (Physiology /Medicine) – from accepting their prizes. The Nazi regime banned all Germans from accepting Nobel Prizes after the 1935 Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to Carl von Ossietzky a German writer who publicly opposed Hitler and Nazism. The three later received their awards but not the prize money.
Boris Pasternak the 1958 Nobel Laureate in Literature initially accepted the prize but was later coerced into declining by Soviet authorities.
Alfred Nobel (1833-1896) made a fortune off dynamite – his most known invention.
Photo: The Nobel Foundation
The father of dynamite
Alfred Nobel was a chemist engineer inventor and entrepreneur. He was born on 21 October 1833 in Stockholm and died on 10 December 1896 in San Remo Italy. He was devoted to the study of explosives and his inventions include a blasting cap dynamite and smokeless gunpowder. Nobel became famous across the world when the St. Gotthard Tunnel in the Swiss Alps was completed in 1881 and dynamite was used for the first time on a large scale.
At the time of his death Nobel held 355 patents in different countries. There were Nobel companies in more than 20 countries with explosives of all kinds being manufactured under his patents in around 90 factories worldwide. Nobel lived and worked in many countries including Sweden Russia France the United Kingdom Germany and Italy. He spoke five languages had a passionate interest in literature and wrote poetry and drama. He could never have imagined how important his prize would become or how much media attention future Nobel Laureates would attract.
A history of culture and science
Between 1901 when the first Nobel Prize was awarded and 2016 a total of 911 Nobel Prizes have been awarded to individuals and organisations. Together they represent a major contribution to the cultural and scientific history of the world.
There have been 885 prizes awarded to individuals and 26 to organisations. Only a few recipients have been honoured more than once which means that a total of 881 individuals and 23 unique organisations have received prizes to date.
The first Nobel Prize in Physics in 1901 went to Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen for his discovery of X-rays used every day by healthcare providers around the World.
In 1903 Marie Curie became the first female Laureate when she was named a joint winner of the Nobel Prize in Physics for her research into radioactivity. She received her second prize in 1911 – this time in chemistry – for isolating and studying the new element radium.
In 1905 Austrian baroness and author Bertha von Suttner became the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize in recognition of her work with the pacifist movements in Germany and Austria. She was also widely seen as inspiring Alfred Nobel with whom she corresponded to create the Peace Prize.
In 1912 Swedish inventor and industrialist Gustaf Dalén won the Nobel Prize in Physics for his contributions to lighthouse technology. In the early 1900s he invented the AGA lighthouse a type of automatic lighthouse that ran on acetylene gas. The gas supply was controlled by a sun valve that shut off the gas in daylight and a revolving light apparatus that allowed the beacon to flash by switching the gas off and on at brief regular intervals. The two innovations made it possible to reduce gas consumption by 90 per cent compared with earlier constructions.
In the autumn of 1945 the Nobel Assembly of professors at Karolinska Institutet gathered to select a Nobel Laureate in Physiology or Medicine. They chose three Laureates including Alexander Fleming for their discovery of penicillin which saved millions of lives in the second half of the 20th century.
In 2016 the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos for his efforts to put an end to his country’s more than 50-year-long civil war. The war has cost the lives of at least 220 000 Colombians and displaced close to six million people.
Previous Nobel Peace Prize Laureates include Martin Luther King (1964) Mother Teresa (1979) and Barack Obama (2009). Nobel Laureates in Literature include Ernest Hemingway (1954) Toni Morrison (1993) Dario Fo (1997) and Mario Vargas Llosa (2010). The oldest Laureate in literature was Doris Lessing who won the prize in 2007 at the age of 87.
Around 1 300 guests are invited each year to the grand banquet. Photo: Frederika Berghult/Nobel Media AB
The four institutions awarding prizes:
The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (Nobel Prize in Physics Nobel Prize in Chemistry and Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel) is an independent organisation that aims to promote the sciences and enhance their influence in society. Founded in 1739 it currently has 615 members.
The Swedish Academy (Nobel Prize in Literature) was founded in 1786. It consists of 18 Swedes all elected for life.
The Nobel Assembly at Karolinska Institutet (Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine). Dating from 1977 in its current form the assembly consists of 50 professors at Karolinska Institutet.
The Norwegian Nobel Committee (Nobel Peace Prize) was founded in 1897 and consists of five members appointed by the Norwegian parliament.
The banquet of banquets
The Nobel Banquet is a magnificent party held in the Blue Hall at Stockholm City Hall. The preparations are meticulous. Hundreds of cooks waiters and attendants ensure that everything runs smoothly. Some 1 300 guests are invited with each Laureate entitled to bring 14 guests beside their spouses. Sweden’s royal family is Always present as are the prime minister and other members of the government. The Nobel family is always represented. The remainder of the guest list should reflect the cultural and scientific community of Sweden and the world.
The Nobel Prize calendar
The Nobel Prize Award Ceremony in Stockholm is held on 10 December the anniversary of Alfred Nobel’s death. On the same day the Nobel Peace Prize is awarded in Oslo Norway.
Several other activities take place the same week with receptions and dinners hosted by the institutions awarding prizes the Nobel Foundation and the Swedish Royal Family. The Laureates deliver lectures and talk about their work with panel discussions and other public appearances usually arranged.
Traditionally the Laureates and their spouses sit with the Royal Family at the Nobel Banquet. They are also invited to a more intimate dinner at the Royal Palace where they meet the Royal Family again. The visit to the Nobel Foundation is a great symbolic event.
The Laureates receive a document confirming the prize amount and sign their names in a guestbook thereby joining hundreds of famous predecessors.
The Nobel week in Stockholm
5 December
The Laureates (except for the Nobel Peace Laureate) arrive in Stockholm.
6–8 December
The Laureates deliver their lectures. The institutions awarding the prizes arrange press conferences receptions and dinners.
9 December
The Nobel Foundation and the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences host a joint reception for all the Laureates at the Nordic Museum.
10 December
The Nobel Prize Award Ceremony is held in the Stockholm Concert Hall where the King of Sweden presents each Laureate with a Nobel Prize Medal and a Nobel Prize Diploma. A televised banquet is then held at Stockholm City Hall.
